README.md, before:

# customhys

<img align="left" src="./docfiles/chm_logo.png?raw=true" width="200"/>

**Customising optimisation metaheuristics via hyper-heuristic search** (CUSTOMHyS). This framework provides tools for solving, but not limited to, continuous optimisation problems using a hyper-heuristic approach for customising metaheuristics. Such an approach is powered by a strategy based on Simulated Annealing. Also, several search operators serve as building blocks for tailoring metaheuristics. They were extracted from ten well-known metaheuristics in the literature.

Detailed information about this framework can be found in [1, 2]. Plus, the code for each module is well-documented.

### 🛠 Requirements:
Python 3.7 and higher. Packages: NumPy 1.18.5, SciPy 1.5.0, Matplotlib 3.2.2, json 2.0.9, tqdm 4.47.0.

## 🧰 Modules

The modules that comprise this framework depend on some basic Python packages, as well as they liaise each other. The module dependency diagram is presented as follows:

![Module Dependency Diagram](docfiles/dependency_diagram.png)

**NOTE:** Each module is briefly described below. If you require further information, please check the corresponding source code.

### 🤯 Problems (benchmark functions)

This module includes several benchmark functions as classes to be solved by using optimisation techniques. The class structure is based on Keita Tomochika's repository [optimization-evaluation](https://github.com/keit0222/optimization-evaluation).

Source: [``benchmark_func.py``](customhys/benchmark_func.py)

### 👯‍♂️ Population

This module contains the class Population. A Population object corresponds to a set of agents or individuals within a problem domain. These agents themselves do not explore the function landscape, but they know when to update the position according to a selection procedure.

Source: [``population.py``](customhys/population.py)

### 🦾 Search Operators (low-level heuristics)

This module has a collection of search operators (simple heuristics) extracted from several well-known metaheuristics in the literature. Such operators work over a population, i.e., modify the individuals' positions. 

Source: [``operators.py``](customhys/operators.py)

### 🤖 Metaheuristic (mid-level heuristic)

This module contains the Metaheuristic class. A metaheuristic object implements a set of search operators to guide a population in a search procedure within an optimisation problem.

Source: [``metaheuristic.py``](customhys/metaheuristic.py)

### 👽 Hyper-heuristic (high-level heuristic)

This module contains the Hyperheuristic class. Similar to the Metaheuristic class, but in this case, a collection of search operators is required. A hyper-heuristic object searches within the heuristic space to find the sequence that builds the best metaheuristic for a specific problem.

Source: [``hyperheuristic.py``](customhys/hyperheuristic.py)

### 🏭 Experiment

This module contains the Experiment class.  An experiment object can run several hyper-heuristic procedures for a list of optimisation problems.

Source: [``experiment.py``](customhys/experiment.py)

### 🗜️ Tools

This module contains several functions and methods utilised by many modules in this package.

Source: [``tools.py``](customhys/tools.py)

### 💾 Data Structure

The experiments are saved in JSON files. The data structure of a saved file follows a particular scheme described below.

<details>
<summary> Expand structure </summary>
<p>

```
data_frame = {dict: N}
|-- 'problem' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {str}
:  :
|-- 'dimensions' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :
|-- 'results' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {dict: 6}
|  |  |-- 'iteration' = {list: M}   
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'time' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'performance' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'encoded_solution' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'solution' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: C}
|  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: 3}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- search_operator_structure
:  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'details' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {dict: 4}
|  |  |  |  |-- 'fitness' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'positions' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'historical' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {dict: 5}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'fitness' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'positions' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'centroid' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'radius' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'stagnation' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'statistics' = {dict: 10}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'nob' = {int}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Min' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Max' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Avg' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Std' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Skw' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Kur' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'IQR' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Med' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'MAD' = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :
```
where:
- ```N``` is the number of files within data_files folder
- ```M``` is the number of hyper-heuristic iterations (metaheuristic candidates)
- ```C``` is the number of search operators in the metaheuristic (cardinality)
- ```P``` is the number of control parameters for each search operator
- ```R``` is the number of repetitions performed for each metaheuristic candidate
- ```D``` is the dimensionality of the problem tackled by the metaheuristic candidate
- ```I``` is the number of iterations performed by the metaheuristic candidate
- ```search_operator_structure``` corresponds to ```[operator_name = {str}, control_parameters = {dict: P}, selector = {str}]```
</p>
</details>

## 🏗️ Work-in-Progress

The following modules are available, but they may do not work. They are currently under developing.

### 🌡️ Characterisation

This module intends to provide metrics for characterising the benchmark functions.

Source: [``characterisation.py``](customhys/characterisation.py)

### 📊 Visualisation

This module intends to provide several tools for plotting results from the experiments.

Source: [``visualisation.py``](customhys/visualisation.py)

## Sponsors

<a href="https://tec.mx/en" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/logoTEC_full.png" width="250"></a>
<a href="http://www.cas.cn/" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/cas_logo.png" width="250"></a>
<a href="https://www.gob.mx/conacyt" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/conacyt-logo.png" width="250"></a>

## References

1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, H. Terashima-Marín, and Y. Shi, CUSTOMHyS: Customising Optimisation Metaheuristics via Hyper-heuristic Search, SoftwareX, vol. 12, p. 100628, 2020.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711020303411)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, S. E. Conant-Pablos, H. Terashima-Marín, H., and Y. Shi. _Hyper-Heuristics to Customise Metaheuristics for Continuous Optimisation_, *Swarm and Evolutionary Computation*, 100935.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2021.100935)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, S. E. Connat-Pablos, and H. Terashima-Marín, A Primary Study on Hyper-Heuristics to Customise Metaheuristics for Continuous Optimisation. CEC'2020.](docfiles/SearchOperators_CEC.pdf)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, I. Amaya, Y. Shi, H. Terashima-Marín, and N. Pillay, Towards a Generalised Metaheuristic Model for Continuous Optimisation Problems, Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 2046, Nov. 2020.](https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/8/11/2046)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, I. Amaya, and N. Pillay, _Global Optimisation through Hyper-Heuristics: Unfolding Population-Based Metaheuristics_, *Appl. Sci.*, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 5620, 2021.](http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app11125620)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, N. Pillay. Automated Design of Unfolded Metaheuristics and the Effect of Population Size. 2021 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 1155–1162, 2021.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC45853.2021.9504879)

Commit message:

[Neural Network Solver] CUSTOMHyS v1.1 (#4)
* Ignore ml models

* Add NN + Dynamic

* EOF new line

* EOF + raise

* Use new functionalities + rename NN.py

* Set v1.1

* Unit test

* CI

* Req

* nit

* typos

* Update requirements

* init?

* Fix UT

* protobuf

* Update requirements

* numpy

* notignore

* tree

* Fix root

* Py version

* Modify python

* Update operators.py

Fix selectors' name

---------

Co-authored-by: Jorge Mario Cruz-Duarte <jorge.cruz@itesm.mx>

README.md, after:

# customhys

<img align="left" src="./docfiles/chm_logo.png?raw=true" width="200"/>

**Customising optimisation metaheuristics via hyper-heuristic search** (CUSTOMHyS). This framework provides tools for solving, but not limited to, continuous optimisation problems using a hyper-heuristic approach for customising metaheuristics. Such an approach is powered by a strategy based on Simulated Annealing. Also, several search operators serve as building blocks for tailoring metaheuristics. They were extracted from ten well-known metaheuristics in the literature.

Detailed information about this framework can be found in [1, 2]. Plus, the code for each module is well-documented.

### 🛠 Requirements:
Python 3.8 and higher. Packages: NumPy 1.20.3, SciPy 1.5.0, Matplotlib 3.2.2, json 2.0.9, tqdm 4.47.0, tensorflow 2.8.0, pandas 1.5.3, scikit-learn 1.2.2.

## 🧰 Modules

The modules that comprise this framework depend on some basic Python packages, as well as they liaise each other. The module dependency diagram is presented as follows:

![Module Dependency Diagram](docfiles/dependency_diagram.png)

**NOTE:** Each module is briefly described below. If you require further information, please check the corresponding source code.

### 🤯 Problems (benchmark functions)

This module includes several benchmark functions as classes to be solved by using optimisation techniques. The class structure is based on Keita Tomochika's repository [optimization-evaluation](https://github.com/keit0222/optimization-evaluation).

Source: [``benchmark_func.py``](customhys/benchmark_func.py)

### 👯‍♂️ Population

This module contains the class Population. A Population object corresponds to a set of agents or individuals within a problem domain. These agents themselves do not explore the function landscape, but they know when to update the position according to a selection procedure.

Source: [``population.py``](customhys/population.py)

### 🦾 Search Operators (low-level heuristics)

This module has a collection of search operators (simple heuristics) extracted from several well-known metaheuristics in the literature. Such operators work over a population, i.e., modify the individuals' positions. 

Source: [``operators.py``](customhys/operators.py)

### 🤖 Metaheuristic (mid-level heuristic)

This module contains the Metaheuristic class. A metaheuristic object implements a set of search operators to guide a population in a search procedure within an optimisation problem.

Source: [``metaheuristic.py``](customhys/metaheuristic.py)

### 👽 Hyper-heuristic (high-level heuristic)

This module contains the Hyperheuristic class. Similar to the Metaheuristic class, but in this case, a collection of search operators is required. A hyper-heuristic object searches within the heuristic space to find the sequence that builds the best metaheuristic for a specific problem.

Source: [``hyperheuristic.py``](customhys/hyperheuristic.py)

### 🏭 Experiment

This module contains the Experiment class.  An experiment object can run several hyper-heuristic procedures for a list of optimisation problems.

Source: [``experiment.py``](customhys/experiment.py)

### 🗜️ Tools

This module contains several functions and methods utilised by many modules in this package.

Source: [``tools.py``](customhys/tools.py)

### 🧠 Machine Learning

This module contains the implementation of Machine Learning models which can power a hyper-heuristic model from this framework. In particular, it is implemented a wrapper for a Neural Network model from Tensorflow. Also, contains auxiliar data structures which process sample of sequences to generate training data for Machine Learning models.

Source: [``machine_learning.py``](customhys/machine_learning.py)

### 💾 Data Structure

The experiments are saved in JSON files. The data structure of a saved file follows a particular scheme described below.

<details>
<summary> Expand structure </summary>
<p>

```
data_frame = {dict: N}
|-- 'problem' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {str}
:  :
|-- 'dimensions' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :
|-- 'results' = {list: N}
|  |-- 0 = {dict: 6}
|  |  |-- 'iteration' = {list: M}   
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'time' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'performance' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'encoded_solution' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'solution' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: C}
|  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: 3}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- search_operator_structure
:  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |-- 'details' = {list: M}
|  |  |  |-- 0 = {dict: 4}
|  |  |  |  |-- 'fitness' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'positions' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'historical' = {list: R}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {dict: 5}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'fitness' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'positions' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'centroid' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {list: D}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'radius' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 'stagnation' = {list: I}
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |-- 0 = {int}
:  :  :  :  :  :  :  :
|  |  |  |  |-- 'statistics' = {dict: 10}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'nob' = {int}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Min' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Max' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Avg' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Std' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Skw' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Kur' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'IQR' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'Med' = {float}
|  |  |  |  |  |-- 'MAD' = {float}
:  :  :  :  :  :
```
where:
- ```N``` is the number of files within data_files folder
- ```M``` is the number of hyper-heuristic iterations (metaheuristic candidates)
- ```C``` is the number of search operators in the metaheuristic (cardinality)
- ```P``` is the number of control parameters for each search operator
- ```R``` is the number of repetitions performed for each metaheuristic candidate
- ```D``` is the dimensionality of the problem tackled by the metaheuristic candidate
- ```I``` is the number of iterations performed by the metaheuristic candidate
- ```search_operator_structure``` corresponds to ```[operator_name = {str}, control_parameters = {dict: P}, selector = {str}]```
</p>
</details>

## 🏗️ Work-in-Progress

The following modules are available, but they may do not work. They are currently under developing.

### 🌡️ Characterisation

This module intends to provide metrics for characterising the benchmark functions.

Source: [``characterisation.py``](customhys/characterisation.py)

### 📊 Visualisation

This module intends to provide several tools for plotting results from the experiments.

Source: [``visualisation.py``](customhys/visualisation.py)

## Sponsors

<a href="https://tec.mx/en" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/logoTEC_full.png" width="250"></a>
<a href="http://www.cas.cn/" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/cas_logo.png" width="250"></a>
<a href="https://www.gob.mx/conacyt" target="_blank"><img src="./docfiles/conacyt-logo.png" width="250"></a>

## References

1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, H. Terashima-Marín, and Y. Shi, CUSTOMHyS: Customising Optimisation Metaheuristics via Hyper-heuristic Search, SoftwareX, vol. 12, p. 100628, 2020.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711020303411)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, S. E. Conant-Pablos, H. Terashima-Marín, H., and Y. Shi. _Hyper-Heuristics to Customise Metaheuristics for Continuous Optimisation_, *Swarm and Evolutionary Computation*, 100935.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2021.100935)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, S. E. Connat-Pablos, and H. Terashima-Marín, A Primary Study on Hyper-Heuristics to Customise Metaheuristics for Continuous Optimisation. CEC'2020.](docfiles/SearchOperators_CEC.pdf)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, I. Amaya, Y. Shi, H. Terashima-Marín, and N. Pillay, Towards a Generalised Metaheuristic Model for Continuous Optimisation Problems, Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 2046, Nov. 2020.](https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/8/11/2046)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, I. Amaya, and N. Pillay, _Global Optimisation through Hyper-Heuristics: Unfolding Population-Based Metaheuristics_, *Appl. Sci.*, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 5620, 2021.](http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app11125620)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, N. Pillay. Automated Design of Unfolded Metaheuristics and the Effect of Population Size. 2021 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 1155–1162, 2021.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC45853.2021.9504879)
1. [J. M. Tapia-Avitia, J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, H. Terashima-Marin, and N. Pillay. _A Primary Study on Hyper-Heuristics Powered by Artificial Neural Networks for Customising Population-based Metaheuristics in Continuous Optimisation Problems_, 2022 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2022.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC55065.2022.9870275)
1. [J. M. Cruz-Duarte, I. Amaya, J. C. Ortiz-Bayliss, N. Pillay. _A Transfer Learning Hyper-heuristic Approach for Automatic Tailoring of Unfolded Population-based Metaheuristics_, 2022 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2022.](https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC55065.2022.9870426)
